
CSL Notebook Topic
To    CSL        Date     August 10, 1984 
From    Mike  Kupfer        Location    PARC
Subject  Internal structure of Alpine Locks    Organization    CSL
XEROX
Release as    [Indigo]<Alpine>Release52>Doc>LockInternals.press
Came from    [Indigo]<Alpine>Release52>Doc>LockInternals.tioga
Last edited    by Kupfer, August 11, 1984 2:37:26 pm PDT
Abstract    The Alpine Lock Manager controls a complicated web of variant 
    records.  This memo describes the variant record structure and 
    gives an example taken from a running Alpine server.  It may be 
    necessary to read the memo once, look at the example, and then
    read the memo again.
Introduction
    The Alpine file service, as designed, supports atomic transactions that span multiple servers.  This document briefly explains the 
    high-level interface to Alpine locks, and it explains the complicated data structure that each Alpine server's Lock Manager 
    maintains.
Lock interface
    Alpine names a lock with a LockID (defined in AlpineInternal.mesa).  Unlike, say, a transaction ID, a LockID always refers to 
    exactly one object, such as a file or a page, even across events such as server crashes.  A client of the Lock interface is 
    some other module in Alpine, acting on behalf of a transaction.  This client may request that the lock manager Set a lock in a 
    given mode.  If there is already a conflicting lock set, the client may specify whether it wishes to wait until the lock is 
    available, or whether it wishes to be informed immediately that someone else has the lock.  A lock may be held by more than one 
    transaction, and a transaction may hold more than one lock.
    Given the lock, the transaction may Release it when it no longer needs it.  The transaction manager also has the power to abort a 
    transaction and take all of its locks away, usually so that the locks can be given to other transactions.
What the Lock Manager needs
    Suppose a transaction requests the lock MyLock.  The Lock Manager must quickly find this lock in a potentially large jungle of 
    other locks, determine if anyone else has MyLock, and determine whether the two transactions can both have MyLock at the same 
    time.  If there is a conflict and the requesting transaction wishes to wait, the Lock Manager must place the request in a 
    queue, waiting for the lock's eventual availability.
    Suppose that a transaction completes (either commits or aborts).  The Lock Manager must find all of the locks owned by the 
    transaction and free them.  If another transaction is waiting for one of these locks, the Lock Manager should give the lock to 
    this second transaction.
    Finally, consider the maintenance work that the Lock Manager must do.  It should be able to detect a circular chain of requests 
    (deadlock), and it should be able to scan waiting requests to find cases of livelock (aka starvation).  It should be able to 
    perform these tasks quickly and with little overhead, so that problems are corrected quickly and with little performance loss.
The Solution
    The Alpine Lock Manager uses a single data structure to meet these varied needs.  This data structure consists of many variant 
    records, all of which are tied together by assorted REF links into circular and simple singly-linked lists.
LockInternal.Object
    The variant record that the Alpine Lock Manager uses is defined in LockInternal.mesa.  A Lock Object always contains a requestList 
    REF and a body record.  The two main variants of a Lock Object -- request and header -- are distinguished by varying the body.  
    We shall refer to these two variants as "request objects" and "header objects," respectively.  The requestList REF links 
    objects associated with one lock into a circular list, as we will explain below.
Header Object
    Recall that an Alpine LockID uniquely identifies one object that is to be locked (eg., a page or a file).  When a transaction 
    requests a lock, the Lock Manager enters a request object for the transaction on a circular list associated with the desired 
    LockID.  This circular list is tied together with the requestList REF, as stated above.  A header object also sits in the 
    circular list, and it identifies which lock is being requested.
    The Lock Manager refers to header objects via a hash table, using the lockID as the hash key.  The next field is used by the hash 
    package to connect header objects that hash to the same location.
Request Object
    A request object always contains a transaction handle, a transList REF, and mode information.  The transaction handle tells what 
    transaction the request object is associated with.  We will describe the transList REF below.  The mode tells what locking mode 
    has been requested.  The rest of a request object is yet another variant record, consisting of either a granted, a waiting, or 
    a transHeader variant.
waiting variant
    When a transaction must wait for a lock, the Lock Manager creates a "waiting" variant for the transaction.  All of the "waiting" 
    request objects are tied in a singly-linked, non-circular list through the transList REF.  This list is used, for example, by 
    the Lock Watchdog to find lock requests that have timed out.
granted variant
    When the Lock Manager grants a request, it makes a "granted" variant for the transaction.  This object sits in a cicular list 
    containing all granted requests for the transaction.  The list itself is bound together via the transList REF.
transHeader variant
    In addition to the transaction's granted requests, the transList-threaded circular list contains a transHeader.  This object 
    identifies the transaction and contains a count of the (granted) request objects in the list.
An Example
    The accompanying diagram (filed in [Indigo]<Alpine>Release52>Doc>LockExample.griffin) was derived by tracing pointers on a running 
    Alpine server (Monitor.alpine).  It shows the lock objects for two transactions, numbers 402 and 1002.   There are four locks 
    involved, as  shown by the four header objects: A, B, C, and D.
The transactions
    A transaction's locks are associated with its worker(s), so "self," in the upper left corner, is a Worker.Handle for transaction 
    402.  It points to the circular list of all the locks that 402 has been granted.  Because the requestList REF is present in all 
    Lock objects but doesn't have a useful function in a transHeader, it is NIL in the transHeader.  The transHeader for 1002 is at 
    the bottom of the diagram, in the middle.
    Transaction 402 has been granted all four locks (A, B, C, and D).  Transaction 1002 has been granted one lock (D), and is waiting 
    for another (C).  Transaction 1002 is waiting because it is requesting a mode that is incompatible with the mode that 402 has 
    locked C with.
The locks
    Lock A has been granted to one transaction (402).  It is the only lock in its hash bucket, so its "next" field is NIL.
    Lock B has been granted to 402.  B's and C's lockID's hash to the same value, so B is linked to C via "next".
    Lock C has been granted to 402, and 1002 is waiting for it.  The "waiting" request object for 1002 is the last one in the Lock 
    Manager's list of waiting objects.
    Lock D has been granted to both 402 and 1002.
