Pup: An Internetwork Architecture

by David R. Boggs, John F. Shoch, Edward A. Taft, and Robert M. Metcalfe1


CSL-79-10           July 1979, revised October 1979




Abstract: Pup is the name of an internet packet format (PARC Universal Packet), a hierarchy
of protocols, and a style of internetwork communication. The fundamental abstraction is an
end-to-end media-independent internetwork datagram. Higher levels of functionality are
achieved by end-to-end protocols that are strictly a matter of agreement among the
communicating end processes.


This report explores important design issues, sets forth principles that have guided the Pup
design, discusses the present implementation in moderate detail, and summarizes experience
with an operational internetwork. This work serves as the basis for a functioning internetwork
system that provides service to about 1000 computers, on 25 networks of 5 different types,
using 20 internetwork gateways.



Key words and phrases: computer networks, protocols, packet switching, internets,
network interconnection, gateways, datagrams, virtual circuits, fragmentation



Accepted for publication in IEEE Transactions on Communications, April 1980.



1
    Present affiliation: Computer Systems Laboratory, Stanford University, Stanford, California 94305.




                                                            XEROX
                                                            PALO ALTO RESEARCH CENTER
                                                            3333 Coyote Hill Road / Palo Alto / California 94304
                                  PUP: AN INTERNETWORK ARCHITECTURE                                      1




1. Introduction

     Research in network interconnection techniques has been motivated by the desire to permit
communication among diverse, geographically distributed computing resources and users
interconnected by a wide variety of network technologies.
     It is the purpose of an internetwork architecture to provide a uniform framework for
communication within a heterogeneous computing, communication, and applications environment.
The work described in this paper represents one internetwork architecture, known as Pup, in
widespread regular use within Xerox. The name referred originally to the abstract design of a
standard internetwork datagram (the PARC Universal Packet), but has expanded in usage to include
the whole hierarchy of internetwork protocols as well as a general style for internetwork
communication.
     To assist in understanding the design of the Pup protocols, it is useful to characterize briefly
the environment in which this architecture has evolved.
     The computational environment includes a large number of Alto’’ minicomputers [Kay, 1977;
Thacker et al., 1979] and other personal computers capable of high-quality interaction with human
users. Supporting these are various specialized server systems that are shared among many users
and provide access to expensive peripherals such as large disks, magnetic tapes, and high-quality
printers. Additionally, there are several general-purpose time sharing systems providing customary
services for terminal users.
     The communications environment includes several different individual network designs. The
dominant one is the Ethernet’’ communications network, a local-area broadcast channel with a
bandwidth of 3 megabits per second [Metcalfe & Boggs, 1976]. Long-haul communication facilities
include the Arpanet, the ARPA Packet Radio network, and a collection of leased lines implementing
an Arpanet-style store-and-forward network. These facilities have distinct native protocols and
exhibit as much as three orders of magnitude difference in bandwidth.
     The applications to be supported include a wide range of activities: terminal access to the time
sharing services, electronic mail, file transfer, access to specialized data bases, document
transmission, software distribution, and packet voice, to name just a few. We would also like to
facilitate more ambitious explorations into the area generally referred to as distributed computing.’’
     This paper is organized as follows. In section 2 we discuss some of the design issues which
have emerged in the formulation of the Pup architecture, while section 3 provides more detail on
the protocols themselves. Section 4 describes briefly some of our operational experience with the
present implementation. The final section presents a retrospective critique of the work, highlighting
some areas which merit further attention.
                                  PUP: AN INTERNETWORK ARCHITECTURE                                       2




2. Design principles and issues

     Constructing an architecture for internetwork protocols is, first and foremost, an exercise in
design: identifying individual issues, exploring alternative solutions, and then knitting these pieces
together to form the final result. Along the way, many compromises are made as one trades off
among different criteria: functionality, efficiency, generality, ease of implementation, extensibility,
and others.
     In this section we enumerate some of the major design issues confronted in the development of
a network architecture and describe, in general terms, the choices made in the development of Pup.
(Several of these and other issues are enumerated in [Cerf & Kirstein, 1978] and [Postel, 1980].)
From this discussion the broad outlines of Pup will emerge; the section that follows provides more
specific detail about the actual design.



2.1. The basic model: individual networks connected with gateways

     As with most internetwork models, one envisions a collection of heterogeneous networks,
connected with a set of internetwork gateways to form a loosely coupled system known generally as
an internet [Cerf & Kahn, 1974; Sunshine, 1977a; Cerf & Kirstein, 1978]. An internet should
provide the ability for any two hosts to communicate, so long as their own local networks are
interconnected.
     An important feature of the Pup internet model is that the hosts are the internet. Most hosts
connect directly to a local network, rather than connecting to a network switch such as an IMP, so
subtracting all the hosts would leave little more than wire. Gateways are simply hosts in the
internet that are willing to forward packets among constituent networks. Thus, most of the
properties of the internet are primarily artifacts of host software. The architecture must scale
gracefully, and in particular must allow for the existence of a degenerate internet consisting of a
single local network and no gateways.



2.2. Simplicity

     One of the guiding principles in designing Pup has been the desire for simplicity. Pup is a
framework for computer communications research, and simplicity is one of the best ways to
minimize restrictions and maximize flexibility for experimentation. Attempting deliberately to
eliminate unneeded complexity helps to keep the design open-ended. This in turn makes it easier
to incorporate the existing diverse collection of networks and hosts and to accommodate new
alternatives as the technology matures. Keeping the design simple helps to avoid building in
technological anachronisms.
     A second motivation for this principle is the desire to foster efficient implementations of the
protocols in the host machines, which are typically quite small. Software overhead must be kept
                                   PUP: AN INTERNETWORK ARCHITECTURE                                         3




low in order to sustain high-bandwidth local communication, which constitutes the bulk of the
traffic; yet the same software must support the full generality of internetwork communication.


2.3. Datagrams versus virtual circuits

     There are two major approaches to providing an interface to packet-switched communications:
accepting individual datagrams, or providing a higher level of service in the form of a virtual circuit.
The two interfaces are not unrelated, since a virtual circuit interface is usually implemented within a
network by the use of datagrams. In some sense, datagrams provide access to a network at a lower
level, closer to its underlying capabilities. Datagrams are particularly useful in many kinds of
transaction-oriented protocols. Furthermore, the task of the internet is significantly simplified if it
need only transport independent, individually-addressed datagrams, without having to maintain the
state required to support virtual circuits. If the internet provides a datagram interface, virtual circuit
interfaces can be provided by adding appropriate mechanisms at the end points.
     Therefore, the basic function provided by the Pup internet is the transport of datagrams; this
simple abstraction is the foundation of Pup. The internet does not guarantee reliable delivery of
datagrams (called Pups’’); it simply gives its best efforts’’ to deliver each one, and allows the end
processes to build protocols which provide reliable communications of the quality they themselves
desire [Metcalfe, 1973]. The internet has no notion of a connection. It transports each Pup
independently, and leaves construction of a connectionif that is the appropriate interprocess
communication modelto the end processes. Keeping fragile end-to-end state out of the packet
transport system contributes to reliability and simplicity.


2.4. Individual networks as packet transport mechanisms

     Individual networks within the internet can be viewed simply as packet transport mechanisms.
As links in the internet they give their best efforts to deliver internet packets, but they do not
guarantee reliable delivery. Packets may be lost, duplicated, delivered out of order, after a great
delay, and with hidden damage. A network can have any combination of bandwidth, delay, error
characteristics, topology, and economics; the routing algorithm should attempt to take these
characteristics into consideration.
     Encapsulation is an invertible, network-dependent transformation performed on a Pup to permit
it to be carried transparently through a network: an abstract Pup is presented at one end,
encapsulated for transmission through the net, and decapsulated at the other end, yielding the
original Pup. For some networks, encapsulation consists merely of adding headers and trailers.
More elaborate transformations may be necessary to pass a Pup through other networks (for
example, using low-level acknowledgments or error correction because the network has a high loss
rate). Encapsulation and decapsulation take place in a network-specific driver in which is vested all
knowledge of the encapsulation technique. The internet specification has nothing to say about
encapsulation except that it be invisible.
                                   PUP: AN INTERNETWORK ARCHITECTURE                                     4




2.5. Internetwork gateways

     We distinguish two kinds of gateways: media translators and protocol translators. Media
gateways are hosts with interfaces to two or more packet transport mechanisms among which they
forward internet datagrams, using the appropriate encapsulation for each. These are the heart of
any datagram-based internet. Protocol gateways are hosts which speak two or more functionally
similar but incompatible higher-level protocols used to transport information within networks,
mapping one higher-level abstraction into the other. (It’s clear that a media gateway is just doing
protocol translation at the link level, but the distinction is useful given the importance of internet
datagrams in this architecture.)
     In the Pup internet, media gateways are by definition simple, since all that is required of the
translation process is that it preserve the semantics of internetwork datagrams. Protocol gateways
are usually more difficult, even when the protocols are similar, since such higher-level protocols
provide richer and more specialized semantics and it is not always clear how one should map the
functionality of one protocol into another. Development of higher-level protocol translators
between different network and internet architecturese.g., between the Arpanet File Transfer
Protocol (FTP) and the Pup-based FTPis a thorny task, but one that must be confronted when
interconnecting systems that do not share the necessary lower-level primitives.



2.6. A layered hierarchy of protocols

     Layering of protocols is one of the most effective means for structuring a network design: each
level uses the functions of the lower level, and adds some functionality of its own for possible use
by the next level. Provided that suitable interfaces are maintained, an implementation at one level
can be modified without impacting the overall structure; this helps to simplify both the design and
the implementation.
     Pup protocols are organized in a hierarchy, as shown in figure 1; the details of this figure will
be presented in section 3. A level represents an abstraction, to be realized in different ways in
different hosts. There are four levels of interest, but there may be more than one protocol at any
level except level 1, representing a different use of the underlying layers. (The numbering of
layersand, indeed, the choice of points at which to divide the layersis arbitrary; there is no
relationship between Pup’s numbering and that of other designs such as the Open Systems
Architecture.)
     The level 0 abstraction is a packet transport mechanism. There are many realizations: an
Ethernet channel, the Arpanet, the ARPA Packet Radio Network, our store-and-forward leased line
network, and others. Level 0 protocols include specifications such as hardware interfaces, electrical
and timing characteristics, bit encodings, line control procedures, and network-dependent packet
formatting conventions. Associated with each packet transport mechanism is a convention for
encapsulating Pups.
                                   PUP: AN INTERNETWORK ARCHITECTURE                          5




Levels 4 and above
Application-defined protocols



Level 3

Conventions for                 Document
                                                 FTP             Telnet         Woodstock
data structuring and             printing
process interaction




                            ?
                            ?  ?
                               ?ZZ
                                 MM??  ??
Level 2
                           ?
                           ?  ?
                              ? M
                                MZ
                                 Z ?
                                   ?   ?
                                       ?
Interprocess
communication
primitives                 ? ?M Z? ?
                         EFTP           RTP             BSP               WFS
                                                                                    Routing table
                                                                                    maintenance




                          NN ||      ?
                                     ?  MM
Level 1
                           NN || ?? MM
Internet packet format
Internet addressing
Internet routing             N | ?M            Internetwork datagram (Pup)




                            ?? CC    Z
                                     Z  ||
Level 0
                            ?
                            ?  C
                               C      Z
                                      Z  |
                                         |
Packet transport
mechanisms
                           ? C
                           Ethernet
                                      Z |     MCA        Arpanet
                                                                          Leased
                                                                           lines
                                                                                        Packet
                                                                                         Radio




                                Figure 1. Pup Protocol Hierarchy
                                  PUP: AN INTERNETWORK ARCHITECTURE                                      6




     The level 1 abstraction is an internet datagram. The realization of this abstraction consists of
the format of a Pup, a hierarchical addressing scheme, and an internetwork routing algorithm.
There is only one box at level 1: the internet datagram protocol; it is this layer of commonality
which unifies all of the different networks that might be used at level 0, and which makes available
a uniform interface to all of the layers above. It is the purpose of this level to provide media
independence while maintaining the common properties of the underlying packet networks.
     The level 2 abstraction is an interprocess communication mechanism: a way to move bits
without saying much about their form or content. Various level 2 protocols provide many
combinations of reliability, throughput, delay, and complexity. These protocols can be divided into
two classes according to the amount and lifetime of state information kept by the communicating
end processes. Connectionless protocols support short-lived interactions; the end processes maintain
little state, and usually only during the exchange of a few Pupsno more than a few seconds.
Connection-based protocols support sustained interactions, generally requiring substantial state to be
maintained at both ends, and for longer periodsminutes to hours.
     Level 3 adds structure to the data moved at level 2, as well as conventions for how processes
interact. For example, the File Transfer Protocol (FTP) consists of a set of conventions for talking
about files and a format for sending them through a level 2 byte stream protocol connection. These
are sometimes referred to as function-oriented protocols [Crocker et al., 1972].
     Above level 3 the dividing lines become blurred, and individual applications evolve with their
own natural decomposition into additional layers. With respect to layering of protocols, Pup is
similar in many ways to the ARPA Internet and TCP design [Cerf & Kahn, 1974] and the Open
Systems Architecture [Zimmermann, 1980]. Unlike the Open Systems Architecture (and others),
Pup often has several alternative boxes which all rest on a lower level and offer different
functionality and interfaces to the next higher level.



2.7. Naming, addressing, and routing

     Names, addresses and routes are three important and distinct entities in an internet [Shoch,
1978]:

         The name of a resource is what one seeks,
         an address indicates where it is, and
         a route is how to get there.

     A name is a symbol, such as a human-readable text string, identifying some resource (process,
device, service, etc.) An address is a data structure whose format is understood by level 1 of the
internet, and which is used to specify the destination of a Pup. A route is the information needed
to forward a Pup to its specified address. Each of these represents a tighter binding of information:
names are mapped into addresses, and addresses are mapped into routes. Error recovery should
successively fall back to find an alternate route, then an alternate address, and then an alternate
name.
                                   PUP: AN INTERNETWORK ARCHITECTURE                                       7




     The mapping from names to addresses is necessarily application-specific, since the syntax and
semantics of names depend entirely on what types of entities are being named and what use is
being made of them. This is dealt with at the appropriate higher levels of protocol.
     An address field, as contained in a Pup, is one of the important elements of commonality in
the internet design. An end process sends and receives Pups through a port identified by a
hierarchical address consisting of three parts: a network number, a host number, and a socket
number. This structure reflects the attitude that the communicating parties are the end processes,
not the hosts’ protocol handlers; among other things, this permits alternate implementations of a
higher-level protocol to coexist in a single machine. (In contrast, the ARPA Internet project [Postel,
1980] takes the position that the socket abstraction does not belong at the internet level; therefore,
ARPA Internet addresses contain only network and host numbers. When a packet arrives, it is first
demultiplexed by the protocol type field in the internet header; higher-level protocols such as the
TCP, datagram protocol, and packet voice protocol then impose their own concept of socket if they
find it usefulwhich, as a practical matter, they all do.)
     The actual process of routing a packet through the Pup internet uses a distributed adaptive
routing procedure. The source process specifies only the destination address and not the path from
source to destination. The internetwork gateways route Pups to the proper network, a network then
routes Pups to the proper host, and a host routes Pups to the proper socket.
     This routing process is associated with Level 1 in the protocol hierarchy, the level at which
packet formats and internet addresses are standardized. The software implementing level 1 is
sometimes referred to as a router. Thus, the routing table itself is kept at level 1; a very simple host
(or gateway) would need only levels 0 and 1 in order to route Pups. But the routing table also
requires periodic updating, as gateways exchange and distribute their current routing information;
this routing table maintenance protocol is found logically at level 2 of the hierarchy.
     Gateways provide internet routing tables to individual hosts as well as to each other. Hosts use
this routing information to decide where to send outgoing packets destined other than to a directly-
connected network.



2.8. Flow control and congestion control

     Although the terms are often confused, flow control and congestion control attack two very
different problems in packet-switched communication. Flow control is a mechanism used to
regulate the behavior of a specific source and destination pair, so that the source does not send data
at a rate greater than the receiver can process it. In an internet architecture, flow control remains
the responsibility of the end-to-end protocols, particularly those at level 2 supporting regular stream
traffic.
     Congestion control is a network-wide mechanism, used to control the number and distribution
of packets in the network so as to prevent system overload. Internet congestion control is necessary
to help protect the gateways from being burdened with excessive traffic.
                                     PUP: AN INTERNETWORK ARCHITECTURE                                      8




        The Pup datagram-based internet model does not require that the internet successfully deliver
every packet that has been accepted. Therefore, an intermediate gateway which suddenly
encounters a period of severe congestion is free to discard packets, although the system should be
engineered to make this an uncommon event.
        If a gateway is forced to discard an incoming packet because of congestion, it should attempt to
return some information to the source: an error Pup (negative acknowledgment) indicating that a
packet had to be discarded in mid-route. This error Pup is simply returned to the source port, as
identified in the discarded Pup; this is a good illustration of the value of including the socket
number as part of the standard internet address. The source process can use this information to
modify its transmission strategiesfor example, to reduce its offered load (the rate at which it
attempts to send Pups along the congested path) and thereby help to relieve the congestion.
        Long-term congestion should eventually be reflected in the routing information exchanged
among gateways, discouraging subsequent traffic from attempting to pass through a badly congested
area.



2.9. Reliable transport

        Defining datagrams to be less than perfectly reliable is realistic since it reflects the
characteristics of many existing packet transport mechanisms. Probabilistic transmission is basic to
the theory of operation of network designs such as Ethernet. Even in networks nominally designed
to deliver correctly sequenced, error-free packets, occasional anomalies may result from certain
hardware or software failures: an Arpanet IMP may crash while holding the only copy of a packet,
or an X.25 virtual circuit may be reset.
        As mentioned previously, the Pup internet always has the option of discarding packets to
relieve congestion, though this is certainly not an optimal strategy. This point is of considerable
practical importance when one considers the complicated measures required to avoid deadlock
conditions in the Arpanetconditions which are a direct consequence of attempting to provide
reliable delivery of every packet in a store-and-forward network [Metcalfe, 1973; McQuillan &
Walden, 1977]. Packet management strategies that attempt to guarantee perfect reliability must be
designed to operate correctly under worst case conditions, whereas strategies that have the option of
discarding packets when necessary need operate correctly only under most conditions. The idea is
to sacrifice the guarantee of reliable delivery of individual packets and to capitalize on the resulting
simplicity to produce higher reliability and performance overall.
        For some applications, perfectly reliable transport is unnecessary and possibly even undesirable,
especially if it is obtained at the cost of increased delay. For example, in real-time speech
applications, loss of an occasional packet is of little consequence, but even short delays (or worse,
highly variable ones) can cause significant degradation [Cohen, 1977; Sproull & Cohen, 1978].
                                   PUP: AN INTERNETWORK ARCHITECTURE                                       9




     Reliable delivery requires maintaining state information at the source and destination. The
actions of a large class of simple servers, such as giving out routing tables or converting names into
addresses, are idempotent (i.e., may be repeated without incremental effects), and a client of that
service can simply retransmit a request if no response arrives. These protocols reduce to a simple
exchange of Pups, with an occasional retransmission by the client, but with no state retained by the
server. (The server may choose to retain answers to the last few requests to improve response time,
but this optimization is invisible to the protocol.)
     On the other hand, many applications such as file transfer and terminal connection do depend
upon fully reliable transmission. In these cases, it is perfectly reasonable to build a reliable end-to-
end protocol on top of the internet datagrams. Ultimately, reliability (by some definition) is always
required; the issue is where it should be provided. The Pup attitude is that it is the responsibility
of the end processes to define and implement whatever form of reliable transport is appropriate to
the situation.



2.10. Packet fragmentation

     It is inevitable that some process will want to send an internet packet which is too large to be
directly encapsulated for transmission through an intermediate network that has a smaller maximum
packet size. This problem is usually approached with one of two forms of packet fragmentation
[Shoch, 1979a].
     With internetwork fragmentation, an internet-wide design specifies the operations to be
performed on a packet that is too large for a network it is about to enter. The internet datagram is
fragmented into a number of smaller internet datagrams, thereafter to be transported independently
and reassembled at the ultimate destination. This is the approach taken, for example, in the ARPA
Internet design. It requires every destination to have procedures for reassembly.
     Alternatively, one may use intranetwork fragmentation (or network-specific fragmentation):
when presented with an oversize packet, the network-specific driver undertakes to fragment the
packet in a manner specific to that network, to be reassembled by the corresponding driver as the
packet exits the network (e.g., at the next gateway). This approach confines the fragmentation and
reassembly procedures to the level 0 modules of hosts directly connected to the network in which
fragmentation is required.
     The Pup design does not attempt to provide any form of general internetwork fragmentation.
This complex issue has been simply legislated out of existence by requiring that every agent in the
internet handle Pups up to a standard maximum size, using network-specific fragmentation where
necessary.
                                   PUP: AN INTERNETWORK ARCHITECTURE                                        10




2.11. Broadcast packets

       Broadcast packets are a particularly useful means for locating available resources or distributing
information to many hosts at once. Some local networks, such as the Ethernet, directly support
transmission of broadcast packets. In store-and-forward systems, however, specialized algorithms are
required to propagate a packet efficiently to all hosts [Dalal, 1977; Dalal & Metcalfe, 1978]; no
existing store-and-forward networks support any technique besides brute-force transmission of a
packet to every node, though such a capability is now being implemented in the Arpanet.
       Broadcasts may also be expensive since every host that receives one must expend some
resources, if only to discard it. In networks where a broadcast involves generating more than one
packet, there is the additional cost of creating and transporting the extra copies. Because of their
potentially high cost, internet-wide broadcasts are not presently supported in the Pup design. Nor is
it clear that such a capability would be desirable, since it would not extend well to a very large
internet. The problem of locating distant resources in the internet at reasonable cost is a topic of
current research.
       But Pups can be broadcast on a single network; they are frequently used to locate nearby
resources, or to permit gateways to announce their presence on a network. Implementation of the
broadcast procedure is left to the network-specific driver, using the best technique available on that
net.



2.12. Privacy and security

       It must be recognized that in practical internet environments, packets may be delivered to the
wrong host, intercepted by another host, or generated by a host masquerading as some other host.
To prevent this would require one to interpose some agent between hosts and the internet and to
specify a secure access control procedure. This would significantly increase the complexity of the
internet, and truly suspicious users would probably not trust it anyway.
       Processes are encouraged, however, to ensure the privacy and authenticity of their
communication by whatever end-to-end encryption techniques seem appropriate [Needham &
Schroeder, 1978]. Particularly vulnerable components, such as gateways and servers, should take
precautions to protect their own integrity, but ultimate responsibility rests with the end processes.
The Pup internet does not attempt to protect users from traffic analysis or from malicious replay of
previous traffic.
                                  PUP: AN INTERNETWORK ARCHITECTURE                                      11




3. Implementation

     The preceding section has outlined some of the important properties of the Pup architecture
and the internetworking issues it addresses. What follows is a more detailed description of the
present design of the four major layers in the system.



3.1. Level 0: packet transport

     An individual network moves network-specific packets among hosts; the addressing schemes,
error characteristics, maximum packet sizes, and other attributes of networks vary greatly. An
internetwork packet transport mechanism, however, moves Pups between hosts. The level 0 code
which transforms a network into an internet packet transport mechanism is called a network driver.
     A machine connected to a single network, therefore, has one level 0 network driver; a gateway
has one driver for each directly-connected network. Only the driver knows about the peculiarities
of a network’s hardware interface and low-level protocol.
     The interface between levels 0 and 1 is very simple. Level 1 passes down a Pup and a
network-specific host address, and the driver encapsulates the Pup and does its best to deliver it to
the specified host. When a Pup arrives at a host, the driver decapsulates it and passes it up to level
1; if for any reason the Pup looks suspicious (as determined by network-specific error checking), the
driver discards it.
     Every packet transport mechanism must be able to accept a maximum-size Pup; if the actual
network cannot directly encapsulate a packet of that size for transmission, the driver must include
some form of intranetwork fragmentation.
     A network driver may also be asked to broadcast a packet to all other hosts on that net. On
some networks this is straightforward; on others it may require use of a reverse-path forwarding
algorithm [Dalal & Metcalfe, 1978] or brute-force replication of the packet to each destination.
     The transport mechanisms don’t have to be perfectly reliable, but they should be successful
most of the timea packet loss rate of less than 1 percent is usually acceptable. A network
operating for a short time in a degraded mode with a higher loss rate is harmless, so long as the
probability is low that Pups will transit more than one net that is in this condition. However, if a
network’s inherent error characteristics are unfavorable, the driver should take steps to improve its
performance, perhaps by incorporating a network-specific low-level acknowledgment and
retransmission protocol.
     To date, there have been five major types of networks integrated into the Pup architecture,
each with a different level 0 driver.

Ethernet. Local Ethernet facilities can very easily serve as transport mechanisms for Pups: a Pup
fits in an Ethernet packet with only a few additional words of encapsulation (see figure 2), and
requires no fragmentation. These systems have good reliability, high speed, and can send broadcast
packets [Metcalfe & Boggs, 1976; Shoch & Hupp, 1979; Shoch, 1979b].
                                     PUP: AN INTERNETWORK ARCHITECTURE                             12




 4 bytes         Ethernet Header
                                                                               PRNet Header             22 bytes
20 bytes         Internet Header
                                                                              Fragmentation ctrl        4 bytes

                                                                               Internet Header          20 bytes


                                             Pup Internet Header
                                                   20 bytes
532 bytes        Internet Data                                                  Internet Data           208 bytes



                                                                              PRNet Checksum            4 bytes


 2 bytes       Internet Checksum
                                                                               PRNet Header             22 bytes
 2 bytes       Ethernet Checksum
                                                                              Fragmentation ctrl        4 bytes
            Ethernet Encapsulation

                                               Pup Internet Data
                                                   532 bytes
 4 bytes         Arpanet Header                                                 Internet Data           228 bytes

20 bytes         Internet Header



                                                                              PRNet Checksum            4 bytes



                                                                               PRNet Header             22 bytes
532 bytes        Internet Data
                                                                              Fragmentation ctrl        4 bytes
                                             Pup Internet Checksum
                                                                                Internet Data           96 bytes
                                           Pup Internet Datagram
                                               (maximum length)
                                                                              Internet Checksum         2 bytes
  2 bytes      Internet Checksum                                              PRNet Checksum            4 bytes

            Arpanet Encapsulation                                        Packet Radio Encapsulation




                            Figure 2. Pup Encapsulation in Various Networks
                                  PUP: AN INTERNETWORK ARCHITECTURE                                      13




MCA. The Multiprocessor Communications Adapter (MCA), a parallel TDM bus, serves as a local
network tying together a limited number of Nova computers [Data General, 1971]. It has good
reliability and requires no fragmentation, but does not support broadcast packets. Broadcasts are
accomplished by the brute-force methodsending a copy of a broadcast packet to each of the
possible hosts.

Arpanet. To cover longer distances, Pups can be routed through the Arpanet; the format for
encapsulating a Pup in an Arpanet message is shown in figure 2. (Note that Arpanet Pup transport
is based on Host-IMP protocol messages, not on Host-Host protocol streams.) Because the standard
maximum Pup length is less than that of an Arpanet message, the driver itself need not fragment
Pups; however, the Arpanet does perform network-specific fragmentation internally: one message’’
containing a Pup may become multiple packets’’ within the Arpanet. Furthermore, the Arpanet
provides increased reliability through the use of its own internal acknowledgment and retransmission
protocols. The Arpanet does not presently support broadcast packets; rather than sending packets
to all possible Arpanet hosts, the network driver does not implement broadcasts at all.

Leased line store-and-forward network. More frequently, different local networks are interconnected
over long distances through the use of a private store-and-forward network constructed using leased
telephone circuits. Similar in spirit to the Arpanet, this system is used to connect internetwork
gateways. Unlike the Arpanet, the system does not use separate packet switches (IMPs), but instead
switches packets through the hosts themselvesthat is, the connected hosts include network-specific
drivers that implement a store-and-forward network. This network has its own adaptive routing
procedure, independent of the internetwork routing. The system is fairly reliable and does not
require low-level acknowledgments. At present, the network drivers do not fragment Pups, but they
do promote small packets to the front of transmission queues at intermediate points to help improve
performance for interactive traffic.

Packet Radio network. On an experimental basis, the ARPA Packet Radio network [Kahn et al.,
1978] has been used to carry traffic among local networks in the San Francisco Bay area. The
Packet Radio network was integrated into the system by building a suitable level 0 network driver
[Shoch & Stewart, 1979]. The system provides good reliability; but due to the relatively small
maximum packet size (232 bytes), the driver must perform fragmentation and reassembly (see figure
2). Though using a broadcast medium, the Packet Radio protocols do not support broadcast
packets. In this case, the low-level driver includes a procedure to periodically identify Packet Radio
hosts that might be running Pup software; when asked to broadcast a packet, the driver sends
copies of it to all such hosts.

     To date we have not used any public packet-switched networks, such as Telenet, as packet
transport mechanisms. These systems usually provide only a virtual circuit interface (X.25) that
requires a user to pay for functionality that may not be needed. Compared to our existing leased
                                   PUP: AN INTERNETWORK ARCHITECTURE                                      14




line network, a Telenet-based packet transport mechanism would not be cost-effective except under
conditions of very light traffic volume. We would prefer to use a service that provided simple,
unreliable datagrams; if there were an appropriate interface, we could dismantle our leased line
store-and-forward network.



3.2. Level 1: internetwork datagrams

     This is the level at which packet formats and internetwork addresses are standardized. It is the
lowest level of process-to-process communication.

3.2.1. Pup format

     The standard format for a Pup is shown in figure 3. The following paragraphs highlight the
sorts of information required at the internet datagram level.
     The Pup length is the number of 8-bit bytes in the Pup, including internetwork header (20
bytes), contents, and checksum (2 bytes).
     The transport control field is used for two purposes: as a scratch area for use by gateways, and
as a way for source processes to tell the internet how to handle the packet. (Other networks call
this the facilities’’ or options’’ field.) The   hop count subfield is incremented each time the packet
is forwarded by a gateway. If this ever overflows, the packet is presumed to be travelling in a loop
and is discarded. A trace bit is specified, for potential use in monitoring the path taken by a
packet.
     The Pup type is assigned by the source process for interpretation by the destination process and
defines the format of the Pup contents. The 256 possible types are divided into two groups. Some
types are registered and have a single meaning across all protocols; Pups generated or interpreted
within the internet (e.g., by gateways) have types assigned in this space. Interpretation of the
remaining unregistered types is strictly a matter of agreement between the source and destination
processes.
     The Pup identifier is used by most protocols to hold a sequence number. Its presence in the
internetwork header is to permit a response generated within the internet (e.g., error or trace
information) to identify the Pup that triggered it in a manner that does not depend on knowledge
of the higher-level protocols used by the end processes.
     Pups contain two addresses: a source port and a destination port. These hierarchical addresses
include an 8-bit network number, an 8-bit host number, and a 32-bit socket number. Hosts are
expected to know their own host addresses, to discover their network numbers by locating a gateway
and asking for this information, and to assign socket numbers in some systematic way not legislated
by the internet protocol.
                PUP: AN INTERNETWORK ARCHITECTURE                              15




                                 Pup Length

             Transport Control                  Pup Type


                               Pup Identifier



Pup Header   Destination Network              Destination Host
(20 bytes)                                                       Destination
                                                                 Port
                           Destination Socket


              Source Network                    Source Host
                                                                 Source
                                                                 Port
                             Source Socket




                                  Data
                            (0 to 532 bytes)




                        Pup Software Checksum


                               Two Bytes




             ,Figure 3. Pup Internet Datagram                    .
                                  PUP: AN INTERNETWORK ARCHITECTURE                                       16




     There are some important conventions associated with the use of network addresses. A
distinguished value of the network number field refers to this network’’ without identifying it.
Such a capability is necessary for host initialization (since most hosts have no permanent local
storage and consequently no a priori knowledge of the connected network number), and to permit
communication to take place within a degenerate internet consisting of an unidentified local network
with no gateways. A distinguished value of the destination host address is used to request a
broadcast. Certain values of the socket number field refer, by convention, to well-known sockets’’
associated with standard, widely-used services, as is done in the Arpanet.
     The data field contains up to 532 data bytes. The selection of a standard maximum packet
length must reflect many considerations: error rates, buffer requirements, and needs of specific
applications. A reasonable value might range anywhere from 100 to 4000 bytes. In practice, much
of the internet traffic consists of packets containing individual pages’’ of 512 bytes each, reflecting
the quantization of memory in most of our computers. But just carrying the data is not enough,
since the packet should accommodate higher-level protocol overhead and some identifying
information as well. Allowing 20 additional bytes for such purposes, we arrive at 532 bytes as the
maximum size of the data field (a somewhat unconventional value in that it is not a power of two).
Thus, there may be between 0 and 532 content bytes in a Pup, so its total length will range from 22
to 554 bytes. Pups longer than 554 bytes are not prohibited and may be carried by some networks,
but no internetwork gateway is required to handle larger ones.
     The optional software checksum is used for complete end-to-end coverageit is computed as
close to the source of the data and checked as close to the ultimate destination as is possible. This
checksum protects a Pup when it isn’t covered by some network-specific technique, such as when it
is sitting in a gateway’s memory or passing through a parallel I/O path. Most networks employ
some sort of error checking on the serial parts of the channel, but parallel data paths in the
interface and the I/O system often are not checked.
     The checksum algorithm is intended to be straightforward to implement in software; it also
allows incremental updating so that intermediate agents which modify a packet (gateways updating
the hop count field, for example) can quickly update the checksum rather than recomputing it. The
checksum may (but need not) be checked anywhere along a Pup’s route in order to monitor the
internet’s integrity.

3.2.2. Routing

     Accompanying the packet format defined at level 1 are the protocols for internetwork routing.
Each host, whether or not it is a gateway, executes a routing procedure on every outgoing Pup, as
illustrated in figure 4. This procedure decides, as a function of the Pup destination port field, upon
which directly-connected network the Pup is to be transmitted (if there is more than one choice), and
it yields an immediate destination host which is the address on that network of either the ultimate
destination or some gateway believed to be closer to the destination. Each routing step employs the
same algorithm based on local routing information, and each Pup is routed independently.
                               PUP: AN INTERNETWORK ARCHITECTURE                             17
Source host


      Source Process
                                   Pup destination
                                   network = B
                                   host = d
                                                         %~&*
          Routing

              W
                                   socket = p

                                   Immediate                56  Network A
                                   destination
                                   network = A
                                   host = g
                                                             &*
      Encapsulation

              W
      Network interface   Host address s
                          on network A
                                                        .56 78
                                                     Gateway                    Host address g
                                                     host Network interface     on network A




 %~&*                                                              W
                                                             Decapsulation
                                                                                        Pup destination
                                                                                        network = B
                                                                                        host = d
                                                                                        socket = p



%~ &*     Network B
                                                                Routing

                                                                   W                    Immediate
                                                                                        destination
                                                                                        network = B


56 78,                                                      Encapsulation

                                                                   W
                                                            Network interface
                                                                                        host = d



                                                                                Host address h


 5678
  Destination
  host Network interface
                             Host address d
                             on network B
                                                                                on network B




   W      Decapsulation
                                      Pup destination
                                      network = B
                                      host = d
                                      socket = p
              Routing

   W                Socket p

      Destination Process

   W                                             Figure 4. Internetwork Routing
                                   PUP: AN INTERNETWORK ARCHITECTURE                                       18




     Routing information is maintained in a manner very similar to the Arpanet-style adaptive
procedures [McQuillan, 1974]. The initial metric used for selecting routes is the hop count’’the
number of intermediate networks between source and destination. The protocol for updating the
routing tables involves exchanging Pups with neighboring gateways and rests logically at level 2 of
the protocol hierarchy. This is an example of a connectionless protocol which doesn’t require
perfectly reliable transmission for correct operation. Changes in internetwork topology may cause
different gateways’ routing tables to become momentarily inconsistent, but the algorithm is stable in
that the routing tables rapidly converge to a consistent state and remain that way until another
change in topology occurs.
     A host which is not a gateway still implements a portion of this level 2 routing update protocol:
it initially obtains an internetwork routing table from a gateway on its directly-connected network,
and it obtains updated information periodically. If there is more than one gateway providing
connections to other networks, the host can merge their routing tables and thus be able to select the
best route for packets directed to any network.



3.3. Level 2: interprocess communication

     Given the raw datagram facility provided at level 1, we can begin to build data transport
protocols, tailored to provide appropriate levels of reliability or functionality for real applications.
     These protocols generally fall into two categories: those in which a connection is established for
a sustained exchange of packets, and those in which individual packets are exchanged on a
connectionless basis. Connection-style protocols usually transport data very reliably, and
transparently.

EFTP: the Easy File Transfer Protocol. This is a very simple protocol for sending files. Each data
Pup gives rise to an immediate acknowledgment, and there is at most one Pup outstanding at a
time. This protocol is an indirect descendent of the one outlined in [Metcalfe & Boggs, 1976]. Its
simplicity makes this piece of communication mechanism easy to include under conditions of very
limited resources. For example, we have implemented a complete EFTP receiver in 256 words of
assembly language, for use in a network-based bootstrap and down-line loading process.

Rendezvous & Termination Protocol (RTP). This is a general means to initiate, manage, and
terminate connections in a reliable fashion [Sunshine & Dalal, 1978]. In normal use, an RTP user
initiates a connection by communicating with a well-known socket at some server. That server will
spawn a new port to actually provide the service, and the RTP will establish contact with this port.
It employs a non-reusable connection identifier to distinguish among multiple instantiations of the
same connection and to cope with delayed packets without making assumptions about maximum
packet lifetimes. RTP also synchronizes Pup identifiers for use in managing the connection.
                                   PUP: AN INTERNETWORK ARCHITECTURE                                    19




Byte Stream Protocol (BSP). This is a relatively sophisticated protocol for supporting reliable,
sequenced streams of data. It provides for multiple outstanding packets from the source, and uses a
moving window flow control procedure. User processes can place mark bytes in the stream to
identify logical boundaries and can send out-of-band interrupt signals. RTP and BSP combined
perform a function similar to that of the TCP, with which they share a certain degree of common
ancestry [Cerf & Kahn, 1974; Postel, 1980].

     Connectionless protocols do not attempt to maintain any long-term state; they usually don’t
guarantee reliability, but leave it up to the designer to construct the most suitable system. Their
simplicity and ease of implementation make them extremely useful.

Echo. A very simple protocol can be used to send test Pups to an echo server process, which will
check them and send back a reply. Such servers are usually embedded in gateways and other server
hosts, to aid in network monitoring and maintenance. The server is trivial to implement on top of
the level 1 facilities.

Name lookup. Another server provides the mapping from string names of resources to internetwork
addresses; this is accomplished by a single exchange of packets. This service is often addressed with
a broadcast Pup, since it is used as the first step in locating resources. (The name lookup service
itself, of course, must be located at a well-known address. To be useful, it must be widely
available; therefore it is typically replicated at least once per network.)

Routing table maintenance. The internetwork routing tables are maintained by Pups exchanged
periodically among internetwork gateways and broadcast for use by other hosts.

Page-level file access. The Woodstock File Server (WFS), one of the family of file servers available
on the internet, provides page-at-a-time access to a large file store [Swinehart et al., 1979]. The
protocols used for this do not require establishment of a connection, but merely exchange request
and response Pups that each carry both commands and file data. This arrangement supports
random-access, transaction-oriented interactions of very high performancefrequently better than
that obtained using local file storage, because the file server’s disks are much faster than those
typically connected to personal computers.

Gateway monitoring and control. There is no single network control center, but individual gateways
may be queried from a monitoring program run on any user machine. With suitable authentication,
the user may assume remote control of the gateway so as to perform operations such as changing
parameters and loading new versions of the software.

     Other connectionless protocols are used to access a date and time server, an authentication
server, and a mail check server integrated with an on-line message system. These protocols are
designed to be as cheap as possible to implement (i.e., without connection overhead) so that such
                                  PUP: AN INTERNETWORK ARCHITECTURE                                    20




servers may be replicated extensively and accessed routinely without consuming excessive resources.
For example, instances of some of these servers are present in all gateway hosts so as to maximize
their availability.



3.4. Level 3: application protocols

     Armed with a reasonable collection of data transport protocols at level 2, one can begin to
evolve specific applications at level 3. These are supported by various function-oriented protocols
[Crocker et al., 1972].

Telnet. Terminal access to remote hosts is provided with an internetwork Telnet protocol, which
makes use of the combination of the Rendezvous & Termination Protocol (RTP) and the Byte
Stream Protocol (BSP) at level 2. Using the notion of a virtual terminal, Telnet implementations
map characteristics of actual terminals into a network-independent representation; a mark byte in
the stream and an out-of-band interrupt, for example, are used to signal an attention.’’ (This
approach is a subset of the Arpanet Telnet protocol, without any of its options such as RCTE
[Davidson, et al., 1977; Feinler & Postel, 1978].)

FTP. The RTP and BSP are again combined as the foundation for an internetwork File Transfer
Protocol (FTP), supporting stream-oriented access to files. The underlying byte streams provide
reliable communication, and the major task of FTP is to communicate commands and responses and
to sort out different representations of data in different file systems. FTP implementations have
been embedded within existing time-sharing systems, and also constitute the core of dedicated, high-
capacity file servers.

Printing. Among the important shared resources in the internet are high-quality printing servers.
Rather than using the fully developed BSP and FTP, the specialized task of sending unnamed,
standard format document files to a printer makes use of the more restricted but much simpler
EFTP.

CopyDisk. Given high-performance networks and simple gateways that can forward Pups among
them efficiently, it is perfectly reasonable to copy entire disk packs through the internet. The
CopyDisk protocol negotiates between the participating machines to ensure that the disks are
compatible, and handles error recovery should something break down.

Remote graphics. Personal display-oriented computers such as the Alto can be used to provide a
convivial front end for large programming systems such as Interlisp. The Alto Display protocol is
used for exchanging descriptions of graphical structures as well as text; it is similar to the ARPA
Network Graphics Protocol, but with extensions to support raster-scanned graphics [Sproull &
Thomas, 1974; Teitelman, 1977; Sproull & Cohen, 1978].
                                  PUP: AN INTERNETWORK ARCHITECTURE                                    21




     Additional applications have included cooperative editing of common documents from multiple
machines, audio communication and packet voice, and many others.
     As users create new applications, these systems tend to develop their own natural layering of
function. Some may require new protocol designs in the existing hierarchy; the Pup architecture
permits this degree of flexibility down to the level of the simple internetwork datagram. As we gain
experience with new systems, common pieces of design will begin to emerge that might be of more
general use; they will eventually find their way into an appropriate place in this hierarchy of
communications protocols.
                                  PUP: AN INTERNETWORK ARCHITECTURE                                     22




4. Evolution, actual experience, and performance

     The Pup architecture emerged against a background of Arpanet protocols. Many of its
important ideasand those of its key relative, TCPfirst appeared during the course of a series of
meetings of the International Network Working Group (IFIP TC-6 WG6.1) during 1973. Pup and
TCP share a number of important principles, most notably that of reliable end-to-end transmission
through an internet. Pup subsequently diverged from TCP as the desire for implementation within
Xerox required decoupling it from TCP’s long and sometimes painful standardization process.
     The fundamentals of the Pup design crystallized in 1974 and have remained essentially
unchanged since then. During this interval many higher-level protocols have been developed, the
implementations have evolved considerably, and the internetwork system has grown to include
approximately 1000 hosts, attached to 25 networks of 5 different types, using 20 internetwork
gateways. The system is in regular use, is quite stable, and requires little regular maintenance or
attention.
     From a functional point of view, this internetwork architecture has been able to fulfill the
needs of a very diverse community. While the bulk of all traffic is carried by means of a few
standard protocols, it has proven extremely valuable to be able to define new protocolsaiming at
different points in the space of performance, cost, and functionalityand to fit them into the
internet protocol hierarchy at any of several levels.
     In terms of performance, the internetwork gateways impose very little overhead because they
are so simple. In regions of the internet where multiple high-bandwidth local networks are
interconnected directly by a single minicomputer-based gateway, there is almost no noticeable
difference between intranet and internet performance. Total throughput in an individual gateway is
high, ranging from 400 to 1000 kilobits per seconds (depending on the particular implementation),
and the typical delay experienced by maximum-length Pups in the case just mentioned is 2 to 5
milliseconds.
     These figures don’t represent limits to what is achievableeven with the relatively low-powered
machines now being used as gatewaysbecause the gateway software has not been highly tuned for
this application but rather is based on general-purpose software packages that are also used in many
other hosts. But the current performance is adequate because the internetwork traffic load is
typically only a tiny fraction of the capacity of the underlying local network channels. There exists
one Alto-based gateway that interconnects three 3-megabit per second Ethernet channels as well as
several 9.6-kilobit per second leased lines and a Packet Radio interface. In general the bottlenecks
are not the gateways but rather the slower communication channels; discard of Pups due to
congestion in gateways is almost exclusively due to overload of the 9.6-kilobit per second lines.
     As might be expected, most of the traffic in our local networks is intranetworkthat is,
consisting of Pups whose source and destination are on the same network. For example,
measurement of one such network has shown a typical volume of 2.2 million packets per day, 72
percent of which are intranetwork packets [Shoch & Hupp, 1979]. Furthermore, of the remaining
                                   PUP: AN INTERNETWORK ARCHITECTURE                                      23




28 percent, more than half consist of traffic to or from another nearby local network connected via
a single gateway. (This site is served by multiple local networks because it is too large to cover with
a single one using existing Ethernet technology, and also because it would exhaust a single
network’s address space.) The rest of the trafficsome 250,000 packets per dayis transported to
or from other campuses in the internet, mostly via the leased line network.
     The higher-level protocols, such as the Byte Stream and FTP, are generally limited in
performance by the processor capacity or the secondary storage bandwidth at the source and
destination. For example, our BCPL implementation of BSP can maintain a data stream at the rate
of about 500 kilobits per second between end processes running on Alto minicomputers, at which
point both machines are CPU-bound. While it is certainly adequate for most applications, we find
this performance somewhat disappointing, and we view it as an indication that BSPthough
substantially simpler than, say, TCPis still too complicated a protocol for high-performance
communication.
     The Pup architecture allows individual networks to be added to the internet system on an ad
hoc basis, with no need for central control or coordination except to assign new network numbers.
Users sharing a local network can assemble gateways and lease lines to other nearby gateways; they
are encouraged to make multiple intergateway connections to provide alternate routes and thereby
reduce the probability of being isolated. The gateway software has evolved to the point where if
one starts a copy of it on a host having at least one connection to the existing internet, it will
automatically obtain the files and other information it needs, announce its availability to the rest of
the internet, and begin forwarding Pups.




5. A retrospective critique, possible improvements, and future research

     While the architecture works extremely well, there are some lessons to be learned from this
experience.



5.1. Addressing and routing

     The size of address fields is a question of continuing controversy. An eight-bit network
number supports up to 256 nets; that is fine for now, but eventually it should be made larger. To
date, 256 hosts per net has not been a problem, though it is likely to become one (for example,
when the Arpanet’s new 24-bit addressing convention starts to receive wide use). We have avoided
variable-length address fields in the Pup design because they increase per-packet processing costs.
     If an internetwork system becomes extremely large, the number of networks becomes so great
that it is no longer practical for all hosts to keep routing table entries for all possible destination
networks. Area routing strategies may be employed to attack this problem [McQuillan, 1974].
Alternatively, one may adopt a scheme in which the local routing table becomes a cache of recently
                                  PUP: AN INTERNETWORK ARCHITECTURE                                     24




used routing information, with routes to specific networks computed and maintained as needed.
The problem of locating routes to distant parts of the internet is an area of current research.
     One could consider revising the entire notion of a hierarchical address space. Under the
current design, it is sometimes necessary to change the host number of a machine which is moved
from one net to anotheran operational annoyance. It is conceivable that every host could be
given a unique address within a flat address space; a more sophisticated mechanism would then be
needed to map addresses into routes, since there would no longer be a network number as part of
the address (except perhaps as a hint, to improve performance).
     We view with some disfavor non-hierarchical organizations in which internet addresses consist
of a concatenation of network-specific addresses [Sunshine, 1977b]. Such arrangements have the
effect of fixing the path to a given destination and blur the distinction between addressing and
routing.
     Socket numbers, which are now 32 bits wide, could easily shrink to 16. Originally, 32 bits were
assigned to allow inclusion of a unique subfield to distinguish among multiple instantiations of a
connection; we now recognize that a better approach is to use a distinct connection identifier at the
time a connection is established, as mentioned earlier in the presentation of the Rendezvous &
Termination Protocol.
     Using hop counts as the metric for routing decisions has worked remarkably well. An obvious
drawback, however, is that it considers a hop through a 9.6-kilobit per second phone line equally as
good as a hop through a 3-megabit per second Ethernet link. As the topology becomes more richly
connected, this will increasingly become a problem. We intend eventually to change the routing
algorithms to reflect some consideration of bandwidth and delay, using known techniques based on
research into adaptive distributed routing algorithms in the Arpanet and elsewhere.
     We have given little consideration to source routing or other forms of advice (e.g., class of
service) provided to the internet routing procedures by source processes. In providing such
facilities, one must take great care not to compromise the simplicity of the basic internet datagrams
or violate the layering of protocols.



5.2. Congestion control and utilization of low-bandwidth channels

     The current congestion control techniques must be regarded as primitive. Discarding Pups and
(where possible) notifying the source process when congestion occurs has the virtue of simplicity,
and we believe it is a good general approach; but the present design has several defects.
Insufficient information is returned to the source process to enable it to make an informed decision
about how to proceed; further, the discard of Pups is haphazard, and no provision is made for
fairness. Congestion occurs most often at the entry to slow channels, and under overload conditions
the perceived performance of paths through those channels is highly variable.
                                  PUP: AN INTERNETWORK ARCHITECTURE                                      25




     This is a situation in which it would be appropriate to perform a relatively large amount of
computation per packet in order to optimize the utilization of the communication bandwidth. For
example, the network-specific driver for a leased telephone circuit could examine the source and
destination addresses of Pups to deduce the existence of conversations’’, and use this information
to share the slow channel more effectively. (The Arpanet IMPs deduce conversations in precisely
this way, though for purposes having to do primarily with flow control rather than congestion
control.)
     In the same vein, techniques such as code compression, elimination and regeneration of
identical internet headers in successive packets, etc., may be implemented in the network-specific
drivers for the slow channels, with minimal impact on the end-to-end protocols. Such techniques
are used widely in virtual circuit designs, and their applicability is sometimes cited as an advantage
of virtual circuits over datagrams [Roberts, 1978]. But there is no reason they can’t be employed in
a datagram-based internet, so long as the necessary additional computation is done in the right
place.
     The important point is that optimizing the utilization of the communication channel is
appropriate only when the channel bandwidth is scarce compared to the computation required to
perform such optimization. Where the processing capacity of the end machines is itself the scarce
resourceas we have observed in the local network environmentsuch techniques are highly
inappropriate.



5.3. Pup types in the internet header

     The distinction between registered and unregistered Pup types at the level of internet datagrams
has not turned out to be particularly useful, except in a few cases: Pups of type error’’ and trace’’
may be generated from within the internet without knowledge of the higher-level protocols being
employed by the end processes.



5.4. Performance of reliable end-to-end protocols

     Present implementations of the Byte Stream Protocol include fairly sophisticated adaptive flow
control heuristics that also try to take note of any packets lost due to internet congestion. This
approach has worked reasonably well in enabling a source to adapt to the conditions encountered
along the path to a particular destination. However, use of networks with highly variable
behaviorsuch as the wide-ranging delays experienced when using the Packet Radio networkcan
confound these heuristics. Under unusual circumstances, the flow control procedures have been
observed to move suddenly into very unfavorable operating regions. The difficulty involving the
Radionet has since been solved, but the general design of simple, effective flow control and
congestion control procedures is just a very hard problemparticularly procedures intended to
adapt dynamically to and make good use of different networks whose performance may vary by
                                  PUP: AN INTERNETWORK ARCHITECTURE                                       26




nearly three orders of magnitude.
     The step from raw Pups to a byte stream may be too large. The Byte Stream Protocol does too
much for many applications; it is complex enough that few systems have ever implemented the
entire specification. As discussed previously, performance of the BSPwhen compared to some
other systemsis reasonable; but it does not give a user the full capacity of the underlying
networks. In a high-bandwidth local network environment, paying attention to per-packet
processing overhead is of extreme importance.
     We have consideredbut have not yet implementeda proposal for an intermediate level of
functionality: a Reliable Packet Protocol (RPP) that takes care of connection establishment and
processes flow control information, but tries not to dictate how a client program should do buffer
management. It ensures reliable delivery (i.e., each packet once and only once), but may deliver
packets to the client out of order, and does not deliberately attempt to hide packet boundaries. A
BSP connectionwhere that is what is desiredmay then be re-implemented as a veneer on top of
an RPP connection.



5.5. Access to the internet

     The present Pup architecture can be characterized as open’’: users and applications are
permittedand indeed encouragedto take advantage of the internet for routine communication.
Access to the internet is uncontrolled; as in many network designs, responsibility for access control
rests with the host systems, and whatever accounting is performed is for the services rendered by
individual servers. In our research and development environment this is ideal, but obviously in
some other environments it might not be.



5.6. Conclusions

     The success of Pup as an internetwork architecture depends on a number of important
principles. Key among these is the layering of function in such a way that applications may make
use of the internet at any of several levels, with the ability to choose among alternative protocols at
each level or to develop new ones where necessary. Simple internetwork datagrams constitute the
level at which media independence (through encapsulation) is achieved; they are also the unit of
direct process-to-process communication. This is crucial both to flexibility and to performance,
particularly in an internetwork environment dominated by relatively lightweight hosts and high-
bandwidth local networks.
     During 1976 the Pup internet reached a level of functionality roughly equivalent to that
provided by the standard Arpanet protocolsbyte streams, Telnet, and FTP. From that time to the
present we have concentrated on building servers and constructing applications to access them
through the internet. We are just beginning to explore that area of interprocess communication
traditionally considered the domain of multiprocessors. Some interesting opportunities arise from
                                   PUP: AN INTERNETWORK ARCHITECTURE                                  27




the availability of 100 or so minicomputers interconnected by a 3-megabit per second broadcast
channel, and by 10 or so similar clusters, all interconnected by a store-and-forward network. We
believe that the Pup architecture serves as a good foundation for such investigations.




Acknowledgments

     A large systems effort such as the development of Pup reflects the efforts of many different
participants. Other people who have implemented parts of Pup and contributed ideas include Will
Crowther, Yogen Dalal, Hal Murray, Bob Sproull, Larry Stewart, Jim White, and Graeme Williams.
     We also wish to thank Danny Cohen, Dave Crocker, Bob Kahn, Jon Postel, and Carl Sunshine
for their careful reading of an earlier draft of this paper.




References
[Cerf & Kahn, 1974]
     Vinton Cerf and Robert Kahn, A Protocol for Packet Network Interconnection, IEEE
     Transactions on Communications, vol. Com-22 no. 5, May 1974.
[Cerf & Kirstein, 1978]
     Vinton Cerf and Peter Kirstein, Issues in Packet-Network Interconnection, Proceedings of the
     IEEE, vol. 66 no. 11, November 1978.
[Cohen, 1977]
    Dan Cohen, Issues in Transnet Packetized Voice Communication, 5th Data Communications
    Symposium, Snowbird, Utah, September 1977.
[Crocker et al., 1972]
    S. D. Crocker, J. F. Heafner, R. M. Metcalfe, and J. B. Postel, Function-oriented Protocols for
    the ARPA Computer Network, AFIPS Conference Proceedings (SJCC), vol. 40, 1972.
[Dalal, 1977]
     Yogen K. Dalal, Broadcast Protocols in Packet Switched Computer Networks, Technical Report
     128, Stanford University Digital Systems Laboratory, April 1977.
[Dalal & Metcalfe, 1978]
     Yogen K. Dalal and Robert M. Metcalfe, Reverse Path Forwarding of Broadcast Packets,
     Communications of the ACM, vol. 21 no. 12, December 1978.
[Data General, 1971]
     Data General Corp., Type 4038 Multiprocessor Communications Adapter, Technical Reference
     014-000002-01, September 1971.
[Davidson et al., 1977]
    J. Davidson, W. Hathaway, J. Postel, N. Mimno, R. Thomas, and D. Walden, The Arpanet
    Telnet Protocol: Its Purpose, Principles, Implementation, and Impact on Host Operating System
    Design, 5th Data Communications Symposium, Snowbird, Utah, September 1977.
                                 PUP: AN INTERNETWORK ARCHITECTURE                                  28




[Feinler & Postel, 1978]
     E. Feinler and J. Postel, eds., Telnet Protocol Specification, Arpanet Protocol Handbook,
     January 1978.
[Kahn et al., 1978]
    R. E. Kahn, S. A. Gronemeyer, J. Burchfiel, and R. C. Kunzelman, Advances in Packet Radio
    Technology, Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 66 no. 11, November 1978.
[Kay, 1977]
    Alan C. Kay, Microelectronics and the Personal Computer, Scientific American, vol. 237 no. 3,
    September 1977.
[McQuillan, 1974]
   John M. McQuillan, Adaptive Routing Algorithms for Distributed Computer Networks, Harvard
   Ph.D. thesis, Report no. 2831, Bolt Beranek and Newman, May 1974.
[McQuillan and Walden, 1977]
   John M. McQuillan and David C. Walden, The ARPANET Design Decisions, Computer
   Networks, vol. 1 no. 5, August 1977.
[Metcalfe, 1973]
    Robert M. Metcalfe, Packet Communication, Harvard Ph.D. thesis, M.I.T. Project MAC TR-114,
    December 1973.
[Metcalfe & Boggs, 1976]
    Robert Metcalfe and David Boggs, Ethernet: Distributed Packet Switching for Local Computer
    Networks, Communications of the ACM, vol. 19 no. 7, July 1976.
[Needham & Schroeder, 1978]
    Roger Needham and Michael Schroeder, Using Encryption for Authentication in Large
    Networks of Computers, Communications of the ACM, vol. 21 no. 12, December 1978.
[Postel, 1980]
     Jon Postel, Internetwork Protocols, IEEE Transactions on Communications, this issue.
[Roberts, 1978]
    Lawrence G. Roberts, The Evolution of Packet Switching, Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 66 no.
    11, November 1978.
[Shoch, 1978]
    John F. Shoch, Internetwork Naming, Addressing, and Routing, 17th IEEE Computer Society
    International Conference (CompCon), September 1978.
[Shoch, 1979a]
    John F. Shoch, Packet Fragmentation in Internetwork Protocols, Computer Networks, vol. 3 no.
    1, February 1979.
[Shoch, 1979b]
    John F. Shoch, Design and Performance of Local Computer Networks, Stanford Ph.D. thesis,
    University Microfilms, August 1979.
[Shoch & Hupp, 1979]
    John F. Shoch and Jon A. Hupp, Performance of an Ethernet Local Networka Preliminary
    Report, Local Area Network Symposium, Boston, May 1979.
                                PUP: AN INTERNETWORK ARCHITECTURE                                    29




[Shoch & Stewart, 1979]
    John F. Shoch and Lawrence Stewart, Interconnecting Local Networks via the Packet Radio
    Network, 6th Data Communications Symposium, Pacific Grove, November 1979.
[Sproull & Cohen, 1978]
     Robert F. Sproull and Dan Cohen, High-Level Protocols, Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 66 no.
     11, November 1978.
[Sproull & Thomas, 1974]
     Robert Sproull and Elaine Thomas, A Network Graphics Protocol, Computer Graphics, vol. 8
     no. 3, Fall 1974.
[Sunshine, 1977a]
    Carl Sunshine, Interconnection of Computer Networks, Computer Networks, vol. 1, 1977.
[Sunshine, 1977b]
    Carl Sunshine, Source Routing in Computer Networks, ACM Computer Communications
    Review, vol. 7 no. 1, January 1977.
[Sunshine & Dalal, 1978]
    Carl Sunshine and Yogen Dalal, Connection Management in Transport Protocols, Computer
    Networks, vol. 2, 1978.
[Swinehart et al., 1979]
    Dan Swinehart, Gene McDaniel, and David Boggs, WFS: A Simple Shared File System for a
    Distributed Environment, Operating Systems Review, vol. 13 no. 5, November 1979.
[Teitelman, 1977]
     Warren Teitelman, A Display-Oriented Programmer’s Assistant, Fifth International Joint
     Conference on Artificial Intelligence, Cambridge, Mass., August 1977; also available as Xerox
     PARC technical report CSL-77-3.
[Thacker et al., 1979]
    C. P. Thacker, E. M. McCreight, B. W. Lampson, R. F. Sproull, and D. R. Boggs, Alto: A
    Personal Computer, Computer Structures: Readings and Examples (Siewiorek, Bell, and Newell,
    eds.), 1979.
[Zimmermann, 1980]
    H. Zimmermann, The ISO Reference Model, IEEE Transactions on Communications, this issue.
